NEXT-12673 - Add data indexer guide (#291)
shopware/docs: guides/plugins/plugins/framework/data-handling/add-data-indexer.md

# Adding data indexer

## Overview

> Data indexer are used to optimize the performance of recurring complex tasks. One good example to understand the benefit of data indexer would be the cheapest price calculation within Shopware. Every product has a `cheapest_price` column in the database which should contain the cheapest price a product has. The calculation of this column can be complex, because a product can have several variants with advanced pricing rules and so on. This makes the calculation more difficult and would take too much time when reading 25 products for a listing. To optimize the performance there is a data indexer that calculates the cheapest price of a product every time the product gets any changes in the database. This means that no new calculation has to be performed when a product is read, and performance during reading is significantly increased. Furthermore data indexer can make use of the [message queue](../../../../hosting/infrastructure/message-queue.md) to handle the calculations asynchronously.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data indexer are used to optimize the performance of recurring complex tasks. One good example to understand the benefit of data indexer would be the cheapest price calculation within Shopware. Every product has a `cheapest_price` column in the database which should contain the cheapest price a product has. The calculation of this column can be complex, because a product can have several variants with advanced pricing rules and so on. This makes the calculation more difficult and would take too much time when reading 25 products for a listing. To optimize the performance there is a data indexer that calculates the cheapest price of a product every time the product is updated by the DAL. This means that no new calculation has to be performed when a product is read, and performance during reading is significantly increased. Furthermore data indexer can make use of the [message queue](../../../../hosting/infrastructure/message-queue.md) to handle the calculations asynchronously.
```

## Prerequisites

This guide is build upon the [plugin base guide](../../plugin-base-guide.md), but any plugin will work here. Just note that all examples are using the plugin mentioned above. In order to create data indexer you should have read the [adding complex data guide](./add-custom-complex-data.md).

## Adding an own data indexer

> It is possible to add data indexer for own entities, like the one created in the [adding complex data guide](./add-custom-complex-data.md) or adding indexer for existing entities. However, if you want to react on changes of existing entities the preferred way should be subscribing to the events if available. See the [Index data using existing events](Index data using existing events) section below. To create a new indexer, just create a new class in your plugin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to add data indexer for your own entities, like the one created in the [adding complex data guide](./add-custom-complex-data.md) or for existing entities. However, if you want to react on changes of existing entities the preferred way should be subscribing to the events if available. See the [Index data using existing events](Index data using existing events) section below. To create a new indexer, just create a new class in your plugin:
```

### Use DAL functionalities in the indexer
By default, indexing is also active while working with an indexer, which means, that entities that are written over the DAL also trigger `EntityWrittenContainerEvent` events. So the indexers are triggered again. This can lead to an infinite loop. Therefore, the connection should be used directly to alter data in the database. However, if you want to use the DAL for manipulation data in a data indexer, indexing can be disabled. This can be done by passing adding a flag to the context, as shown in the example below:
```php
public function update(EntityWrittenContainerEvent $event): ?EntityIndexingMessage
{
    $updates = $event->getPrimaryKeys(CustomerDefinition::ENTITY_NAME);

    if (empty($updates)) {
        return null;
    }

    $context = $event->getContext();
    $context->addExtension(EntityIndexerRegistry::DISABLE_INDEXING, new ArrayEntity());

    return new EntityIndexingMessage(array_values($updates), null, $context);
}
```

> ## Index data using existing events

Reviewer: Link https://github.com/shopware/platform/blob/trunk/adr/2021-05-14-when-to-use-plain-sql-or-dal.md somewhere

    {
        foreach ($customerIndexerEvent->getIds() as $id) {
            $this->writeLog($id);
        }
    }

    private function writeLog($customerId)
    {
        $this->connection->executeStatement('INSERT INTO `log_entry` (`id`, `message`, `level`, `channel`, `created_at`) VALUES (:id, :message, :level, :channel, now())', [
            'id' => Uuid::randomBytes(),
            'message' => 'Updated customer with id: ' . $customerId,
            'level' => 1,
            'channel' => 'debug'
        ]);
    }
}
```
The service definition for the subscriber would look like this.
```xml
<?xml version="1.0" ?>
<container xmlns="http://symfony.com/schema/dic/services"
           xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
           xsi:schemaLocation="http://symfony.com/schema/dic/services http://symfony.com/schema/dic/services/services-1.0.xsd">

    <services>
        <service id="Swag\BasicExample\Service\Subscriber" >
            <argument type="service" id="Doctrine\DBAL\Connection" />
            <tag name="kernel.event_subscriber" />
        </service>
    </services>
</container>
```

> It is recommended to work directly with the `Connection` since the event is dispatched in the context of an indexer. If we would use the Data Abstraction Layer \(DAL\) for writing changes to the database, the indexer could be triggered again, because it listens for `EntityWrittenContainerEvent` events. This could lead to an infinite loop. Using the `Connection` directly prevents the DAL from dispatching entity written events.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to work directly with the `Connection` since the event is dispatched in the context of an indexer. If we would use the Data Abstraction Layer \(DAL\) for writing changes to the database, the indexer would be triggered again, because it listens for `EntityWrittenContainerEvent` events. This would lead to an infinite loop. Using the `Connection` directly prevents the DAL from dispatching entity written events.
```
Also link to ### Use DAL functionalities in the indexer
